The instructions in the readme.md are basically everything you need to know to build the card.
I just want to add a few little bits of information for people who got kits from me.

All chips have been tested.  The ROM has been pre-programmed, although if you have issues or have a
V20 CPU in your PC, you can get a lot better performance if you re-flash the bios.

The tall header is made to be cut into 2 pins and used as a "taller" header where the CF reader connects to
the 3-in-1.  If you notice, the 40 pin header is taller than usual to allow room for the CF card to sit upside down
without hitting the 3 in 1.
See the https://github.com/mudmin/AnotherMaker/blob/master/tandy-3-in-1/IDE%20Adapter%20Modifications.pdf guide.

When you follow that guide, the 2 pins that provide power to the CF reader are probably going to be too long.
I recommend installing the cf reader, and then trimming those pins however much you need to trim it so everything
sits level. It's a bit fiddly, but you'll get it. in the event it all goes wrong you can solder wire or the extra pins
provided on that connector to make it all work. That's why they're there.

This next part is VERY IMPORTANT.
It is possible to fit the CF reader on but be misaligned.
1. If your cf reader is pressed up against the serial port, you did it wrong.
2. If there is not a gap between the shroud of the cf ide connector and the female connector on the 3in1, you did it wrong.
3. If the power connector has to connect to the 2 pin female header at a steep angle, you did it wrong.
4. If you put your card in the computer and the fan does not spin, you did it wrong.
5. Finally if you flip the card over and test for continuity between the 2 power pins that connect to the CF card and it
beeps, you did it wrong.

If it's wrong, pull the cf reader back off and when it goes on right, you'll know.

These cards have a lot of soldering and will take some time to build. I recommend building them, then going back through and
checking every connection. If you have a short or goof something, the 74688 chips die in a hurry and you will get weird
behavior later.

When you plug the card in, you should immediately see 640k of ram and the bios for the cf reader should come up after that.
